---
title: chapter1
date: 2016-09-19 08:49 UTC
tags:
---


# Chapter 1: Introduction
In late 1764, while repairing a small Newcomen steam engine, the
idea of allowing steam to expand and condense in separate
containers sprang into the mind of James Watt. He spent the next
few months in unceasing labor building a model of the new engine.
In 1768, after a series of improvements and substantial borrowing,
he applied for a patent on the idea. August 1768 found Watt in
London about the patent and he spent another 6 months working
hard to obtain it. The patent was finally awardoed in January 1769.
Nothing much happened, in terms of production, for a few years
until, in 1775, after another major effort supported by his new
business partner Matthew Boulton, Watt secured an Act of
Parliament extending his 1769 patent until the year 1800. The great
statesman Edmund Burke spoke eloquently in Parliament in the
name of economic freedom and against the creation of unnecessary
monopoly – but to no avail. The connections of Watt’s partner
Boulton were too solid to be defeated by simple principle.
Once Watt’s patents were secured, a substantial portion of
his energy was devoted to fending off rival inventors. In 1782, Watt
secured an additional patent, made “necessary in consequence of ...
having been so unfairly anticipated, by [Matthew] Wasborough in
the crank motion.” More dramatically, in the 1790s, when the
superior and independently designed Hornblower engine was put
into production, Boulton and Watt went after him with the full force
of the legal system. In contrast to Watt, who died a rich man, the
inventor Jonathan Hornblower was not only forced to close shop,
but found himself ruined and in jail.

Prior to the start of Watt’s commercial production in 1776,
there were 510 steam engines in the U.K., most using the inefficient
Newcomen design. These engines generated about 5,000
horsepower. By 1800, when Watt's patents expired, there were still
only 2,250 steam engines used in the U.K., of which only 449 were
the superior Boulton and Watt engines, the rest being old
Newcomen engines. The total horsepower of these engines was
35,000 at best. In 1815, fifteen years after the expiration of the Watt
patents, it is estimated that nearly 100,000 horsepower was installed
in the U.K., while by 1830 the horsepower coming from steam
engines reached 160,000. The fuel efficiency of steam engines is not
thought to have changed at all during the period of Watt’s patent;
while between 1810 and 1835 it is estimated to have increased by a
factor of five. After the expiration of the patents in 1800, not only
was there an explosion in the production of engines, but steam
power finally came into its own as the driving force of the industrial
revolution. In the next 30 years steam engines were modified and
improved, and such crucial innovations as the steam train, the
steamboat and the steam jenny all came into wide usage. The key
innovation was the high-pressure steam engine –development of
which had been blocked by Watt by strategically using his 1775
patent. Many new improvements to the steam engine, such as those
of William Bull, Richard Trevithick, and Arthur Woolf, became
available by 1804: although developed earlier these innovations
were kept idle until the Boulton and Watt patent expired. None of
these innovators wished to incur the same fate as Jonathan
Hornblower.

Ironically, not only did Watt use the patent system as a legal
cudgel with which to smash competition, but his own efforts at
developing a superior steam engine were hindered by the very same
patent system he used to keep competitors at bay. An important
limitation of the original Newcomen engine was its inability to
deliver a steady rotary motion. The most convenient solution,
involving the combined use of the crank and a flywheel, relied on a
method patented in 1780 by James Pickard, which prevented Watt
from using it. Ironically, Watt also made various attempts at
efficiently transforming reciprocating into rotary motion, reaching,
apparently, the same solution as Pickard. But the existence of a
patent forced him to contrive an alternative less efficient mechanical
device, the “sun and planet” gear. It was only in 1794, after the
expiration of Pickard’s patent that Boulton and Watt adopted the
economically and technically superior crank.
The impact of the expiration of his patents on Watt’s empire
may come as a surprise as well. Despite the fact that “many
establishments for making steam-engines of Mr. Watt's principle
were then commenced” nevertheless “it would appear that the object
principally aimed at was cheapness rather than excellence, for they
fell short as to performance of the Soho [Boulton and Watt]
engines.” As a result we find that “Boulton and Watt for many years
afterwards kept up their price and had increased orders.”
In fact, it is only after their patents expired that Boulton and
Watt really started to manufacture steam engines. Before then their
activity consisted primarily of extracting hefty monopolistic
royalties. Independent contractors produced most of the parts, and
Boulton and Watt merely oversaw the assembly of the components
by the purchasers.

